Coffeescript Good and Bad
=========================

The past two weeks I have been programming in <a href="http://Coffeescript.org">Coffeescript</a> almost exclusively. So far I&#39;ve build a web app, a trio of daemons, and a full widget framework w/ pub/sub hub. I&#39;ve been through about 1k loc of Coffeescript now and have a fairly good handle on it&#39;s strengths and it&#39;s weaknesses. Once you&#39;ve built a full suite of applications in a language using every feature there of, you really don&#39;t have any excuse for not forming an opinion. <br><br>The good:<ul><li>concision -> syntax for production of functions is a big improvement, not perfect but big</li><li>yaml -> a slightly less big issue is yaml, being able to omit {} is handy</li><li>() -> dropping of () for function application helps with limiting their use for precedence overriding!</li><li>... -> range, slice, and splice operators are handy, but argument splats are less usefull than they first seem</li><li>object decomposition -> this is a nice to have, but I&#39;ve been spoiled by pattern matching lingos still a little immature</li></ul><br>The bad:<ul><li>class -> class produces multiply wrapped objects which do a poor job at using the prototype chain and defeats more intelligent object usage</li><li>:: -> manipulation of the prototype in this fashion violates no action at a distance, and is poor prototype based practice</li><li>if then else -> hfs this is messed up, a good old ternary operator is desparatly missed</li><li>? -> while this ever so versatile word is a great concept, it however is defined poorly for catching cases where an object has a valueOf that is falsy</li><li>extends -> implements basic inheritance but makes mixins and traits impossibly cludgey to implement</li></ul><br>Most of what is missing from the language isn&#39;t terribly obvious to the average javascripter.  Things like auto return are annoying as hell if you are accustomed to chaining your functions. Having a function default to &#39;return this&#39; is much more handy based on a quick tally of my functions. Implicit return which makes me add @ at the end of 90% of my functions is annoying.  Another sin of omission is the persistence of assignment. If you are writing proper OO code, a method should be used to communicate with an object. Under no circumstances should you directly manipulate the property of an object!  The common use for :: is in direct opposition to this, and should be considered bad form, especially since modifying the prototype affects all objects. <br><br>The fact that Coffeescript goes to such lengths to make classical inheritance sort of work, but fails to observe the idea of private state is to say the least annoying. More to the point, there are things Coffeescript does to create local variable scope which is defeated by still so heavily relying upon property manipulation. <br><br>This is not to say Coffeescript is a miserable programming environment, more that it suffers too much from an intellectual heritage that JavaScript was originally designed to get the fuck away from. <br>