Entrepreneurshipitis
====================

There is a peculiar disease that affects a small subset of the population, entrepreneurshipitis. It&#39;s symptoms include a passionate desire to build new things, to solve problems, and practice discretion. My wife and I both have it. She runs her own green energy company, and I&#39;ve started up 3 as a co-founder. I often find myself walking through my day thinking, "do I have any problems shared by millions of other?  Would they be willing to spend 1,2,5,10,20,50,100 dollars per month to solve this problem? Is there an existing solution that costs less than what I am willing to pay?"<br><br>When you have entrepreneurshipitis, you find yourself doing this in the shower, cooking breakfast, sitting on a bus to Manhattan, walking down 42nd Street, in the elevator, as you walk to get coffee (coffee now there&#39;s something people will pay 5-20/day for). You even do this while sitting at work where work is another startup where your job is to think up solutions to other businesses problems. You know you have this disease when even when you go to the bathroom you text message ideas for non-competing businesses to your wife and friends. <br><br>It is a disease that not only infects you and your family, but most of the people in your address book as well. Most of your friends have been with you through raising seed capital or an A round. Some of them even still share bank accounts with you, for those businesses you&#39;ve shelved until the market catches up. At night you don&#39;t have time to watch TV, because your social calendar is full of meeting with people to talk about their ventures, raising capital for your spouse&#39;s ventures, or attending conferences to network.  You know it is a disease when you spend most of your time with your kids on weekends or on FaceTime. (I FaceTime x2 a day). <br><br>Why do you do this?  <br><br>Because you have a disease. <br><br>It is called being an entrepreneur. <br><br>And you can&#39;t shake it. <br><br>You just have to grab that tiger by the teeth,<br>and take the plunge down that throat. 