Conceptual Restructuring of My Personal Information Space
=========================================================

While working on a rather fun project to turn <a href="http://github.com/basho/riak_pipe">riak_pipe</a> into the basis for a prototype of a new video transcoding farm, it struck me that:<br><br><li>there are few good tutorials on building complicated Erlang projects using rebar<li>I promised a set of tutorials on using CouchDB for my new blog software<li>somewhere along the line,  I totally forgot to follow up on the style applied at a distance concept<br><br>So I&#39;m going to start reworking the blog code to do a few different things to address all three of these issues stated above:<br><br><li>I&#39;m going to redo the interface to match www.dloh.org, in terms of a large flat 2D space of nigh infinite extent<li>All of the styles on the pages are going to be applied out of band, and will be fungible via code updates<li> I&#39;m going to move the www.dloh.org code into CouchDB bit by bit and reuse it across the blog<li>When I do each piece I&#39;m going to write a small tutorial (or put up a screen cast) describing what I&#39;ve done<li> Onomatic will also receive some love in a series of posts as I bring online a few new VMs<li>All of my code is going to be written in the blog<li> I am going to release my new compilation tools that are based on the ideas I&#39;ve bandied about behind the Self build server<li> Eventually, I&#39;ll write a build tool that creates a github release of specific tagged sets of code<br><br>This all sounds much more ambitious than it is.  In reality, this blog already runs a minified version of the Phos code base without any of the fancy canvas and device support.  Nearly all of the style is applied via javascript, I&#39;m just going to use my new favorite CSS via JSON trick to break out all of the style elements into separate documents.  I&#39;m also going to write a view in CouchDB that maps timestamp (and document size) to a 2D coordinate, so I&#39;ll start laying out my articles on one big wall, instead of tucked behind little links.  Finally, I need to finish Onomatic so that I can release another piece of software anyways, and that will mean cleaning up that code base, and fixing the rebar bits.  Finally, since I&#39;m going to move my code into the cloud, I might as well produce a highly literate version of it, so I&#39;m going to be borrowing from my NewScript demo heavily, and producing a new kind of code editor.<br><br>Eventually the topology of the site will be 2D but the backend is going to have a load balancer and 2 VMs, which will be running couchdb (for indexed documents), riak (for bucketing builds), onomatic (for application routing), ConnServer (because I want intelligent agents running the site), and either nodejs or jawas2 (which are very similar in concept, just jawas2 will be written in  Self).  Basically, over the next couple months, I&#39;d like to have my environment working on the iPad, iPhone, & most Android tablets.  I&#39;d like it to be accessible anywhere.  And I&#39;d like it to be manageable through direct manipulation.  I&#39;m probably going to even use the NewScript app&#39;s Plan9-esque block creation method for writing new stories.  The idea of also being able to draw lines between related stories really appeals to me.<br><br> 