Dear Recruiters
===============

I get a recruiter a day calling me or sending me emails. Most find me via Google it seems. Some from company databases populated by what I can only assume are consummate professionals. And others are probably trolling LinkedIn and the like. <br><br>Every so often I get an email like this:<br><br><pre><br>Hi ,<br>1)Please go thru the following req and send me your updated resume<br>2) Please send me your best all-inclusive rate per hour on C2C (al)<br>3) Please send me the following details<br> <br>Details<br> <br>Current location :<br>Availability :<br> <br></pre><br><br>This is probably the worst possible was to strike up a conversation. I don&#39;t waste time responding to requests like this because:<br><br> 1.) they can&#39;t afford me<br> 2.) the recruiter is an ass!<br><br>Because of these two factors my response was short and sweet:<br><br><pre><br>Please <br><br>1.) don&#39;t bother contacting me again<br>2.) look for a new line of work<br>3.) brush up on your people skills<br><br>Thanks<br></pre><br><br>Now this may sound dickish, but how dickish is asking me to waste my time to bid on a contract I don&#39;t have time for so he can make a quick buck?<br><br>Some times the recruiters are sweet, but not aware of who they are asking to apply for a job:<br><br><pre><br>Hi David,<br><br>I hope you are well.  I would love to talk to you about the opportunity I have listed below.  It looks like you have a strong skillset and I know you will love this organization.  They have a fantastic team and are financially stable and growing.<br><br>Please take a look and let me know the best time to reach you<br></pre><br><br>And this is a perfect pitch. The recruiter is upbeat, she sells her client, and doesn&#39;t press me for details.   And as a matter of fact She was 100% right. My response was equally up beat:<br><br><pre><br>Hi ???,<br><br>I&#39;d ask you to arrange a call with ???? ?????????, but he sits right next to me, and it&#39;s too much of a hassle to pick up the phone.  Say hi to ???. <br><br>David J Goehrig<br>VP of New Products @ Company in Question<br></pre><br><br>I would love the team since I already worked there and help write the job description she was recruiting for! While they were 100% on target with their hiring search and a great recruiting firm (kinda obvious since we hired them), they are only as good as their database. <br><br>Now if you are an IOS/Android/Ruby/Javascript developer with big data, game design, and online  video expertise.  I have a database of about 200 recruiters who are looking for you. <br><br>If you are a recruiter, I&#39;m sorry if you haven&#39;t gotten a call back, but I really don&#39;t have the time. <br><br>PS. My best C2C for a 3-6 mo project is a flat $500,000. My location is 60% NYC, 40% Buffalo, 95% remote for you.  My availability is flexible based on 50% up front payment, and the remainder on 2 week intervals.  If your client can&#39;t afford that don&#39;t call. 