Dear Web Programmers You Are Doing It Wrong
===========================================

This goes for just about everyone. Quick show of hands, how many of you write applications that are one screenful?<br><br>Have you ever written an application that is one screenful?<br><br>I write lots of one screen applications. <br><br>I have a socket server app that is one screen. <br><br>I have a http app that is one screen. <br><br>I have a one screen KV store app. <br><br>I have a 1 screen app that downloads images and builds a h.264 video. <br><br>I have a 1 screen app that searches flickr. <br><br>I have a 1screen app that displays a grid of images and videos ala tumblr. <br><br>I can take any problem and reduce it to one screen. <br><br>But I also build lots of small apps that do one thing well. <br><br>I then have my apps talk to eachother to do more complex things. <br><br>If a problem takes pages of text to describe, it is not a good problem. <br><br>Odds are it is a bunch of little problems conflated and confused into a big one. <br><br>Don&#39;t write big apps to small problems. <br><br>Write small apps to solve small problems.  <br><br>Couple small apps together loosely via messaging. <br><br>Loosely coupled apps with well defined interfaces are components. <br><br>Interchange suitable components as necessary, don&#39;t weld them together. <br><br>Build systems from lots of little processes. <br><br>Think building with Lego, not gluing up models. <br><br>Stop writing glue code. <br><br>You are doing it wrong. 