Using CouchDB as a Wiki Based Blog
==================================

So I am writing up this post on an iPad, in a new text editor built specifically for writing this blog.  It is using a modified wiki syntax in order to generate the page content because I have become rather lazy with my markup. I have also moved my blog from Blogger to a CouchDB application in order to maintain a bit more control over my data and it&#39;s presentation.  I am also working on building out a suite of alternative tools for building couchapps that don&#39;t depend on jquery. One of my main goals for the coming weeks is to describe the process of creating this blog, and the tools used in porting over all of a the old content. <br><br>For a while now, I have been toying around with the idea of putting together more screen casts to demonstrate how a lot of my software is built. I am going to start shooting some more videos and add them to the video section of the blog.  I am also still working through the tagging, comment moderation, and mobile theme for the new blog.  Once the homepage is finalized in its behavior, I am going to do a series of video posts.<br><br>Finally, one of my many game projects is getting off the ground and will soon announce dates.  The base tech behind this site revision will also power that project&#39;s web presence, and act as a backing store for user data.  The big advantage of CouchDB right now over other pieces of infrastructure is how wonderfully self-contained the environment becomes.  Having dirt simple replication is also a pure win.  Not having to switch languages, and still having access to Erlang is just icing on a very sweet cake,