Unary Message Passing Revisited
===============================

More progress and more interesting linguistic artifacts, I was busy last night. I finally finished implementing an idea I had a couple weeks ago, which was to turn _() into a wrapper function that produced function objects to represent built-ins like Number, String, and Array. What it now does is generate a function with an eval property that performs the internal dynamic dispatch. I also override its valueOf and toString methods to return the value of a static closure. This has the downside of producing 2 functions per string or number, but it makes it possible to write:<br><br>  _(2)(&#39;+&#39;)<br><br>Such that this function call returns:<br><br>  function(y){ return x+y }<br><br>where x is bound to 2. <br><br>I also took = and made it an equality operator ( not identity === ) and turned assignment into a right associative operator with a compile time look ahead. The look ahead is operator specific and prevents the dereferencing by default logic:<br><br>  1 + 2 -> foo<br><br>Will generate:<br><br>  _(1)(&#39;+&#39;)(2)(&#39;->&#39;)(&#39;foo&#39;)<br><br>which basically in English does the following:<ul><li>create a closure function object with a valueOf 1</li><li>evaluate its &#39;+&#39; method returning a function returning _(1 + y)</li><li>pass 2 to the function which returns a closure function with valueOf 3</li><li>evaluate that function&#39;s -> method returns a binding function</li><li>the binding function binds window[&#39;foo&#39;] to _(3)</li></ul><br>You can then evaluate foo and get 3. Granted this is a special valueOf 3 so it responds to all the core function methods as well.  Since the valueOf 3 result is also extended with Number methods like the wrapper function, it too can respond to []() style invocations. <br><br>This is also working with Arrays. I have added the forth fetch @ operator to fetch the nth index of the array so:<br><br>  [3,4,5] @ 2<br><br>Returns:<br><br>  _(5)<br><br>This also works with strings such that:<br><br>  &#39;hello&#39; @ 2<br><br>Returns<br><br>  _(&#39;l&#39;)<br><br>There is still work to be done on Object wrappers, writing a better parser, and a lot of edge cases to consider. But this is very close to providing an interesting opportunity to produce new message based flow control constructors. Take &#39;;&#39; which in the current incarnation<br><br>  function(y) { return _(y) }<br><br>Ie it replaces the top of the stack with it&#39;s right hand argument, effectively producing a new statement within a chained function call. This is a vital operator for doing a basic context change. <br><br>  _(1)(&#39;;&#39;)(&#39;foo&#39;)<br><br>Drops 1 and replaces it with &#39;foo&#39; which is then the current context for this. <br><br>If you think about it, nearly all flow control can be modeled in this fashion, and since every partial application returns a function we could do things like:<br><br>  0 - -> negate ; [1,2,3] map negate<br>  1 / -> reciprocal ; [1,2,3] map reciprocal<br><br>Where in Array map generates a function that walks the elements of the array applying the argument function to it. <br>