Return of the Jawas
===================

Today I released the lastest version of Jawas, based on the 2009/2010 branch that I did for Evangelizmo.  Unlike it&#39;s predecessor (2006/2008), it uses <a href="http://luajit.org">LuaJIT</a> for its backend scripting instead of Mozilla SpiderMonkey.  This change came about due to wanting signficantly better performance for high volume transactions.  On a 512MB 1vCPU virtual machine, Jawas consistently generates 120 dynamic documents per second using the scripting engine.  On Rackspace&#39;s OpenStack based offering, that comes out to about $0.50/billion documents.  It manages to perform so quickly in large part because of how it is designed:<ul><li>On boot the core server pre-loads and preparses all of the files in the various vhost directories</li><li>Also it pre-initializes the lua environment, and initializes any database connections, pre-generating any stored procedure bindings necessary</li><li>The server forks one child process per client, but uses keepalive for all requests from that client, using Copy on Write to save memory overhead</li><li>Request processing is entirely event based once in a child process, making maximum use of kernel resources</li><li>70-80% of all CPU load is actually kernel space, the application code itself is usually no more than 15-20% of the total load</li><li>Memory management uses pre-allocated buffers, and memory is only recycled when a child process exceeds its allocation space</li><li>All configuration is done at compile time, avoiding unnecessary logic and code branches</li></ul><br>Currently, Jawas supports Mac OS X, FreeBSD, and Linux.  Due to historical reasons, the Linux support is currently a bit spotty, and I&#39;ve not finished migrating the code base to properlly use inotify (the original linux support used dnotify which is now deprecated).  It requires a <a href="http://postgresql.org">Postgres</a> database in order to take advantage of some of its features, such as automagic binding of Lua closures to Postgres stored procedures, (which was the original inspiration for <a href="http://github.com/cthulhuology/pgproc.lua">pgproc.lua</a>).  These function bindings form the primary basis for most of the backend APIs for all of the production applications that I&#39;ve written using Jawas.  It also influences the structure of how one designs applications, wherein the primary application is typically loaded from a single large file (containing pre-baked assets) and then all subsequent data access is done via AJAX.  This model works very well with Jawas&#39;s internal design, as the keepalive sockets provide ready access to the datastream.<br><br>Going forward there are a few features I am planning on adding to Jawas:<ul><li>WebSockets - which will replalce much of the AJAX calls, and make it easier to use some of the database APIs via a messaging protocol</li><li>AMQP - so that mutliple servers can share data streams so that the WebSocket interface can be optimally used for push</li><li>Web Application Directories (WAD) - which compress an entire directory of files into a single download which can extract and render its contents</li><li>Management Terminal - a web powered ANSI style terminal to allow for remote management of Jawas servers</li><li>LuaJIT FFI bindings - so that all of the internals of the Jawas server are accessible to Lua code without having to extend lws.c</li><li>zlib support - so that all content is returned compressed, further speeding up delivery</li><li>MTU aware transit - altering the way that Jawas shapes traffic to take into account Nagel&#39;s algorithm and game the switch buffers to ensure faster throughtput</li></ul><br>Currently, Jawas is powering <a href="http://jawas.ws">jawas.ws</a>,  which will eventually have more style and documentation on how to use this web application framework.  Having been in development for 10 years now, Jawas represents a considerable amount of blood sweat and caffenated tears.  And it will continue to form the basis of much of the work that I release into the world.  If you&#39;re interested in trying your hand with it the source code is available under the AGPL and can be found <a href="http://github.com/cthulhuology/Jawas">at the Jawas github page here</a>.<br>