Some Thoughts on Syntax
=======================

This post is a digression on developing a mental model for a object message syntax for object creation. If you aren&#39;t interested in a thought experiment stop reading now!<br><br>  1 , 2 , 3<br><br>In this case sending , to 1 generates an Array with one element [1] and subsequent application of , to the array alternately generates a function which concats it&#39;s argument to the array and returns the array with the value appended. So here comma to a Number or String or Array produces an Array. <br><br>  &#39;foo&#39;  : 2 <br><br>Could produce an Object { foo : 2 } and would give us a syntax for generating an array of bindings<br><br>  &#39;foo&#39; :  2 ,<br><br>Would return an Array [{foo:2}] and we could keep using , to append to this array:<br><br>  &#39;foo&#39; : 2 , &#39;bar&#39; , 4<br><br>Which would produce [{foo:2},&#39;bar&#39;, 2] which would be consistent. If we add a : method to array we could produce objects of the form:<br><br>  &#39;foo&#39; : 2 , &#39;bar&#39; : 4<br><br>Which would produce [{foo:2},{bar:4}] which looks a lot like an assoc list in Lisp, which is a reasonable approximation of a JavaScript object. <br><br>  &#39;foo&#39; : 2 , &#39;bar&#39;<br><br>Produces an array [{foo:2},&#39;bar&#39;] which is an intermediate state from the standpoint of an object construction syntax but exactly what one might expect!<br><br>So in this syntax, the operation of : on an array converts the last element to the key of a KV pair. <br><br>We can use () to capture the value of an expression:<br><br>  &#39;foo&#39; : ( 1 + 1 )<br><br>And the nested expression would evaluate and be passed to the continuation : function. We can use this to bind partially applied functions as well!<br><br>  &#39;negate&#39; : ( 0 - )<br><br>Which isn&#39;t terribly clear 