The Power of UnBelief
=====================

One of the skills which may come with experience is the ability to recognize common problems and recite wrote solutions. <br><br>  If A then B else C<br><br>But one of the skills that diminishes with education (a form of experience gathering) is the ability to think laterally:<br><br>  Not A or B but 6<br><br>This ability to extract patterns out of left field usually comes from practicing a style of Zen:<br><br>  assume nothing, believe nothing, know nothing, expect anything <br><br>Children operate in this sort of mode until they learn themselves out of it. <br><br>Mentally we construct models for how things work.  We use those models to make predictions about future events. We assumethese models to be true, and over time become emotionally invested in those modes of thought. While these models prove useful tools for managing problems that are "well known", they almost always fail when we try something new. <br><br>  Trying new things requires failure. <br><br>Fear is the primary motivator for clinging to a set of beliefs. Fear of being wrong, fear of being obsolete, fear of change, fear of success, fear of irrelevancy, all these fears drive us to believe we know what the fuck we&#39;re talking about, and cling to a set of fundamentally unsound beliefs. <br><br>  I believe in ONE God, the Father Almighty, Creator of Heaven and Earth<br><br>We usually believe things because someone we respected told us to do so. Or we inferred a set of beliefs from a pervasive culture which acquired a set of beliefs through a historical chain of accidents. Had the battle of Minovian Bridge gone differently, the council of Niceae would never have happened. <br><br>  Light from light, true god from true god<br><br>Words hundreds of millions of people repeat every Sunday, written by a Roman Emperor, to link his old divine patron Sol Invictus to his new Christian God, do we believe these words because we want to or because 1700 years ago, someone planted the seed of a politically expedient marriage in on man&#39;s ear?  Do we believe this because our ancestors would have been pit to death if they didn&#39;t repeat it publically for a thousand years?<br><br>To question these things is to question one&#39;s identity if one is born and raise Catholic. To voice these thoughts could be considered heresy. A crime that was punishable by death?  Why did Gnostic Christianity or Arianism, or the Manichean schools of though die out?  Did it have to do with Archbishop Ambrose of Milano?<br><br>We do the same sort of thing in technology. Java vs C++, Python vs. Perl, JavaScript vs. Everything. We aren&#39;t any closer to the truth with any of these battles. We aren&#39;t more productive calling some solution a cancer. And we sure as hell not building better systems because of our beliefs. 