Eulogy
======

<pre><br />Norman Bates once said,<br /><br />"A boy&#39;s best friend is his mother"<br /><br />or there is always the Buddha’s corollary<br /><br />“A man’s best friend is his wife”. (bhariya ti parama sakha)<br /><br />Both are true.<br /><br />Joan was a good friend. <br /><br />As many of you know, we drove cross country twice, both routes 80 and 40.<br /><br />We laughed at the Nebraskan corn.<br /><br />We poked fun at the PUNK Momon kids in their neatly pressed jeans.<br /><br />We drove at 140 miles per hour across the salt flats.<br /><br />We almost drove off a cliff into Lake Tahoe.<br /><br />We had fun.<br /><br />In San Francisco,  we had dinner on Fisherman’s Wharf.<br /><br />On our way home, we drove through the painted desert.<br /><br />We played U2’s In God’s Country underneath the Arizona stars.<br /><br />We climbed a mesa at el Morro. <br /><br />We saw the world’s largest cross and the world’s largest McDonalds.<br /><br />We lived large.<br /><br />And twice we went to Europe; once to St. Andrews, and once to Venice.<br /><br />In St. Andrews, we drank Irn-Bru and ate day-old jelly donuts.<br /><br />Watched Harry Potter in the New Picture House built in 1930.<br /><br />At my graduation we sang:<br />Gaudeamus igitur                   (we rejoice therefore)<br />Juvenes dum sumus    (while we are young)<br />Post jucundum juventutem   (after joyous youth)<br />Post molestam senectutem   (after troubled old age)<br />Nos habebit humus.   (the earth will have us)<br /><br />She knew all the words.<br /><br />Ubi sunt qui ante nos    (where are those who before us)<br />In mundo fuere?    (in the world went)<br />Vadite ad superos    (look to heaven)<br />Transite in inferos    (or go to hell)<br />Hos si vis videre.   (if you wish to see them)<br /><br />She knew what they meant.<br /><br />Vita nostra brevis est    (our life is brief)<br />Brevi finietur.     (shortly it will end)<br />Venit mors velociter    (death comes quickly)<br />Rapit nos atrociter    (takes us atrociously)<br />Nemini parcetur.    (no one is spared)<br /><br /><br />When Tara and I got married, she came with us to Venice.<br /><br />We met at the Rio Alto.<br /><br />We toured the Grand Canal.<br /><br />We paraded about the Piazzo San Marco like we owned the place.<br /><br />We lived well.<br /><br />I could go on.<br /><br />We lived a life of adventure.<br /><br />She lived well.<br /><br />And as long as we draw breath, <br /><br /><br /><br /><br />She will live.<br /></pre><br /><br /><hr><br />In the honor of Joan C. Goehrig,  5/6/1950 - 7/27/2009.